Hubble Tension Crisis Explained
user

what is the Hubble tension why is it
causing this huge crisis in cosmology
and is the Big Bang finally busted so
Danny what is the Hubble tension well in
order to answer that question we need to
do some background information you know
in four years in 2028 we're going to be
celebrating the Centennial of discovery
of the Hubble relation many people think
that Evan Hubble then discovered the
expansion of the universe he really
didn't what he discovered was a
correlation between red shift and
distances of galaxies the simplest
interpretation of that is expansion of
the universe now when I say red shift
I'm talking about how fast things in the
universe appear to be getting farther
and farther apart we do that with
spectroscopy we measure the spectrum of
of galaxies we measure their absorption
lines they have in a spectrum and we uh
do basically the kind of science we can
do here on the earth that determine
speeds by doing that the red shifts are
often expressed as kilometers per second
and the distances are expressed in a
mega parac a mega parac is the distance
uh well it's a it's about three and a
half three and a quarter million Lighty
years to put it that way for people so
it's a pretty big unit it's a really big
distance yeah so the hover relation uh
has a has a linear slope a linear
relationship between red shift and
distance and uh to express how rapidly
the universe is expanding getting back
to that terminology again we want to get
the slope of that wine and the value
that Hubble got in 1928 19 29 was 550
km/s per MEAP Parc and he did that by
measuring distances to galaxies the best
he could back then well 100 years we've
come a long way we've built bigger
telescopes we've made more sensitive
detectors we've made advances in other
technology and more importantly we've
made advances in our understanding of
many astrophysical objects such as
galaxies uh
Supernova seate variables all sorts of
things so the value of the Hubble
constant decreased steadily until around
1960 when it reached 50 kilm per second
per Mega Parc and it stayed there much
of my lifetime then about 30 years ago
uh they decided to start increasing that
again as again technology
improved now the gold standard uh for
this has become what we call type 1A
supern noi uh the reason why we we like
those is because they can be seen at
tremendous distances billions of Lighty
years the problem we've always had is
that we can get distances to nearby
galaxies pretty pretty
accurately um but we can't get it for
very distant galaxies until type 1 a
super noi came along now red shifts are
not easy not difficult to do they just
need a large telescope and a lot of
light to to work with it takes time but
you can do it but getting that
correlation is difficult because nearby
galaxies don't have much what we call
Hubble flow but distant galaxies do but
we don't know their distances so that's
why type 1 a supernova come in right so
the nearby galaxies we know their
distance pretty well but we know know we
don't know the red shift very well
whereas far away distances we know the
red shift but we don't know the distance
it's kind of a catch 22 there yeah and I
should should point out I'm talking
about a corrected red shift because red
shifts always have can be two terms
involved one's cosmological red shift
and the other one caused by again
perhaps expansion of the universe the
other is local effects of gravit gravity
and the gravitational effects swamp the
uh the red shift of due to cosmology at
um nearby distances but the great
distances are not important at all hence
the need to go far to do this yeah so in
in general you would say finding red
shifts of galaxies is pretty
straightforward but trying to find
distances a little bit more complicated
a little bit more difficult there Y and
so that's what's causing and the type
one type 1A Supernova really neat for
this we've known about them for a long
time and when I early in my career that
was the the the future of this but how
do you get there uh a supernova is an
eruption of of a star making it much
brighter the used to be in the case of
type 1A Supernova we classify them
different ways by the way but type 1A
all have the seem to have the same Peak
brightness when they reach their Peak
maximum brightness it's a very narrow
range and we can unambiguously identify
type 1 a supernova if we have enough
data on them enough observations so when
you see a type 1 a supernova near its
peak you know really how bright it is
and then it's very straightforward to
calculate from that this Distance by
measuring how bright it appears to us
it's a standard thing we often do
now um the problem is is that type 1 a
supernova occur maybe once a century in
a given Galaxy so either have to be very
lucky or you have to kind of play the
odds better and the neat thing that came
along in the 1990s were robotic
telescopes that uh looked at uh a bunch
of galaxies hundreds or maybe even
thousands per night they took a a
template photograph of the Galaxy and
then the the telescope would go from
Galaxy to Galaxy to Galaxy comparing
new photos it took to the templates
subtracted off and if a spot of light
was left that told you it some sort of
Nova that took place they could then
send an automatic message to an
observatory where astronomers could zero
in with a bigger telescope and start
take recording data so by the mid 1990s
we actually had U good distances now for
um several dozen or several score of
these typ1 a supernova and then we could
also get the red shift at the host
galaxies and voila you a very good hover
relation and Adam ree is one of the guys
who has become kind of the guru of this
he's been doing this for 30 years and
kind of the world expert on doing this
and so he's developed um uh his his
observations over the years he slightly
improves it for every year or two with
new data that he's collected but he's uh
found that the expansion rate of the
universe is around 73 kilom per second
per MEAP parac so that's the one um more
observational uh direct approach of
trying to measure the Hubble constant
but there's another approach that other
uh astronomers like to use a little bit
more so go ahead and explain that one oh
yeah that one's a very different one
very different approach and it relies on
what we call the cosmic microwave
background the CMB for short it was
predicted in 1948 as a result of the of
the Big Bang model and it was discovered
in
1964 and the other cosmologies of the
day could not explain it and so within a
few years the um big bang became the
dominant cosmology and has been for more
than a half century
uh by the way I've uh published here on
our ansers research Journal my
interpretation of what I think is
causing the CMB I don't think it's from
a big bang because we don't accept the
Big Bang because it's not biblical at
all so and real quick why don't we
accept the Big Bang well it's billions
of years it's it has the stars and the
other objects before the Earth you know
those are two biggies right there and we
believe the Earth was made at the
beginning and the stars were made later
and you can't you can't really uh make
that jive with the um with the modern
cosmology Big Bang Yeah inconsistent
with the order of events also the Big
Bang is a naturalistic origin story so
it's based on a whole different set of
beliefs and trying to mix that with your
Christianity that's syncretism no God
required you know is the whole point
about Big Bang people don't realize that
that's what it's all about like any
evolutionary idea or naturalistic idea I
should say the CMB has been studied
extensively they've had three different
satellites one 30 years ago one 20 years
ago one 10 years ago uh studying this
from space uh getting its structure uh
it's it's got It's dappled with warmer
and cooler regions there's a lot we
could talk about with that but uh there
are a lot of neat things details in it
and what people have done is they've
assumed the Big Bang model and uh they
can then go to the the structure of the
CNB that fine structure we see in it and
model that through the big bang and they
can actually tweak out of that a value
of the humble constant and if the Big
Bang model is correct then it ought to
give us the same value you get
observationally
and they've done this and they get about
67 kilometers per second per Mega Parc
yeah so just to kind of recap that's
essentially the crisis here you have
this observational method of saying uh
it's
73 uh kmers per second Mega par sex the
other one is 67 km per second Mega par
SEC and that doesn't seem like a big
difference but it is statistically right
yeah you know 340 years ago that
wouldn't have been a big difference at
all because uh the crudity of the
methods but if they've come a long way
as I said
and that difference of about 10% between
the two values greatly exceeds the um
the the statistical probable errors in
these things when they when they get 73
kilm per second per Mega Parc it's like
plus or minus 610 of of a kilm per
second for Mega par second the other
one's like the same way they're several
uh sigmas separated from each other and
so the big crisis is why are they so
different they ought to agree and you
know I don't know when you've done
science classes and stuff in the past
physics classes it's really great to to
to measure something two different ways
and if you get the same value two
different ways then you know that it's
probably correct but if you measure it
two different ways you get different
values then you know there's a problem
somewhere and that's what they realize
today I think we should call it the
Hubble trouble I think that rhymes a
little TRS trouble with the Hubble um so
in order to explain this Hubble tension
there's basically two different options
either something's wrong with the
observations the direct observations or
there's something wrong with our
understanding of the of the CNB or the
standard model which one do secular
shomers typically choose to believe they
choose to believe both or neither uh
there there that's the reason why
there's there's a problem here because
they are so convinced that both ought to
agree with one another that they're
truly baffled as an observational
astronomer I've always considered myself
to be that I'm always going to side with
the observations if the observations
don't agree with your theory then I'm
sorry your theory is most certainly
wrong the problem is uh many astronomers
can't see the difference between the two
of those but I I like observations
because that's what I do I've always
done that it it's I take images of of
things I photo photograph things with
with telescopes and cameras and you have
a book of that some of those
observations yeah I do it's called the
heavens a different view it's a
beautifully Illustrated picture book
it's U got pictures of galaxies in it
it's uh it's got pictures of nebuli and
everything else I took some of these
photos myself but to tell you the truth
there are better photographers out there
than me astrophotographers so I've got
two other gentlemen who Friends of the
ministry amateur astronomers and they
have taken many of the photos in here so
folks this book is really a really a
delight I enjoyed writing it I enjoyed
talking about it because it's a
beautiful book yeah and my family we
have it my three kids they love it they
look at all the awesome pictures it
motivates them to go outside and start
looking at the stars yeah you know part
of the problem with science is that we
it's something we we read about we learn
about in school but we don't actually do
and one of the neat things about
astronomy is that if you're just reading
about it in a book or learn about in
school you've not really done it God
gave us two eyeballs and appreciation
and our hearts and our minds for the
world around us and uh astronomy is a
really cool thing you can see these
things for yourself so you're saying get
off the couch and go outside and turn
off the light look at God's creation so
it sounds like some of the new data
coming in from James web Space Telescope
it's been confirming a lot of the
previous observations made by Adam Ree
and his his team so does that mean the
model is wrong I think so the news item
recently was that a team led by Adam ree
used the James web Space Telescope
before they' been using the Hubble Space
Telescope and groundbased telescope and
they've extended their their reach with
a James Webb Space Telescope and what
they found out is the value he's been
pushing for the Hubble constant all
along is coming through once again so
yes I uh observations always have to
Trump Theory so I think it's time that
they have to look back at this and some
some scientists including Adam re
starting to see that yeah so going back
to um the fact that they always question
the observation the human error so
that's makes them measure again and
again they keep remeasuring remeasuring
and trying to figure out is the
observations wrong but Adam ree he went
and stated after the new data came in he
said with measurement errors negated
what remains is the real and exciting
possibility that we have misunderstood
the universe so the observations are
telling us one thing the model's saying
something different so does that mean
secular shomers are ready to abandon
their secular models I don't think so
Adam ree by what he meant by that was we
need to to to to redo the the Big Bang
model make some changes to it I don't
think he's ready to abandon it there
aren't many astronomers who willing to
do that but at least they're they're
getting the message there's something
wrong here somewhere they just don't
know what it is I think it's at the
foundation of the thing but they think
it's just the tweaking uh that needs to
be done yeah so again the observations
based on the Hub Space Telescope as well
as the James wether Space Telescope is
giving us a number of 73 whereas the CNB
the more model dependent giving us a
number of 67
and so and the two cannot be reconciled
and they cannot be reconciled they can't
be both correct is that correct Y and so
as we often say our ministry all the
time wrong assumptions leads to wrong
conclusions and so what's the biblical
reason why secular shomers are unwilling
to reconsider their naturalistic beliefs
about the universe uh it's because
they've so committed to naturalism you
know the way science has developed over
the last couple of centuries is that um
we've we've we've brought God less and
less into it you know it's interesting
that the develop Vel of science as we
know it was in it was in the 17th
century 400 years ago and it was led by
by people heavily influenced by
Christianity in biblical Christianity
and they saw unity in the world because
they saw unity in the Creator because
they believed in the Creator there
weren't any atheist among those people
back then for the most part they were
they were theists very very deeply
involved and influenced by Christianity
as I said so they saw this Unity but
somewhere along the line we've lost our
way uh We've begin to realize well the
the the work the word World works like
by Clockwork 400 years ago people
realize it was the Clockwork was being
imposed by the Creator but uh now we say
well the universe just works that way
because it works that way and they don't
give any thought beyond that and so uh
that may not they may not be atheist in
fact I've met very few astronomers who
are atheists most of them aren't but
they even even the most devout people
sometimes can just kind of forget and so
they they get so enwrapped in studying
the world apart from the Creator that
they really don't give him much thought
at all and so you're always looking for
natural explanations behind things
rather than recognizing the Ultimate
answers to the ultimate questions in
life cannot be answered by science and
so that's why they don't question the
model because they can't question the
model if they question the model that
means they're giving up their beliefs of
naturalism the only alternative is
creation that's obviously not something
that they want no and so referring to
biblical creation what do a lot of these
observations mean for biblical
creationists well I don't know yet well
I've been working for years trying to
develop a creation truly creation model
of cosmology one based on the Bible
we're given very few specifics in
scripture which gives us a lot of
freedom but we also have very few
workers I used to be able to count on
one hand how many astronomers uh
creation astronomers we have I'm on a
second hand now by the way but uh I want
to um I want to encourage young people
uh who may be watching and listening to
us today who have an aptitude for this
and may feel a calling uh we need more
astronomers and need a replace people as
myself as we get older so I I'm hoping
the next generation of creation
astronomers can perhaps begin to develop
a model that's eluded me so far yeah and
so speaking of biblical creation as well
maybe someone watching is maybe
wondering um what about those Bible
verses that talks about God stretching
out the heavens does that help explain
some of the expansion of space that
we're seeing yeah there's about a dozen
a dozen passages in the Old Testament
this talking about the expansion or the
the spreading of the heavens and um I
for many many years I thought that was
referring to expansion of the universe
I've changed my mind now about about a
decade ago I believe it's talking about
what happened on day two when God made
this thing called the rakia an expanse
it says on on day two and I I think in
in some of the tenses we find uh past
tense of an action there in some of
those Old Testament passages I think
it's referring to the creation week
rather than what's going on today might
the expansion or or red shift however
you interpret it uh be a kind of a
consequence or a residual of that it
probably could be but I just don't know
yet yeah do biblical creationist do they
have any other explanation for the
Hubble law other than the expansion of
the space no we don't yet and uh we're
divided on that I have no problem with
the universe expanding at all it's just
nothing that I can see that the Bible
necessarily predicts but it could be a
consequence of of uh some model you may
de you may develop based upon that yeah
so based on what we see what we observe
in the universe today based on Adam
Reese's work um in terms of the measure
value of the Hubble content do as do we
as biblical Creations do we have any
problem trying to accept those those
values no we don't I have no problem at
all I think I think the data speak
forsel and I'm very confident of those
data um of course new data may may
replace it that's always happened uh but
as our best understanding now I I'd like
his value of 73 yeah 73 kilometers per
second per Mega par got it right here
Answers in Genesis we assert the
authority of God's word we're all about
equipping the Next Generation with
answers I want to encourage young people
seeking out God's will for their lives
you should uh ask the Lord what what he
wants you to do I'm thinking
particularly of two young people uh
Colin age 11 out of Finley Ohio and also
Violet who recently graduated from aners
Academy here in Northern Kentucky I
understand that you're pursuing or
wanting to pursue a career as an
astronaut maybe we've never met but I
would encourage you to seek God's will
in your life to follow whatever it is he
want you to do if it's astronomy being
an astronaut whatever pursue that with
everything you have as this you're doing
to the Lord because you are so what is
the Hubble tension it's the two totally
different values we get for the
expansion rate of the universe the
Hubble constant and why is it causing
this huge crisis in cosmology because
most astronomers believe that both
values should agree with one another and
they don't and is the Big Bang finally
busted it could be this could be the
beginning of the end of the Big Bang
----- please paraphrase and elaborate, add punctuation 
ChatGPT
### Understanding the Hubble Tension and Its Implications for Cosmology

#### What is the Hubble Tension?

The Hubble tension refers to the discrepancy between two different measurements of the expansion rate of the universe, known as the Hubble constant. This tension has created a significant crisis in cosmology. 

#### Background Information: The Hubble Relation

In 1928, Edwin Hubble discovered a correlation between the redshift and the distances of galaxies. Redshift measures how fast objects in the universe appear to be moving away from us, which is interpreted as the expansion of the universe. The simplest way to understand this is through the Hubble relation, which shows a linear relationship between redshift and distance. The Hubble constant represents the slope of this line, indicating the universe's expansion rate.

#### Early Measurements and Advancements

Initially, Hubble calculated the Hubble constant to be 550 km/s per megaparsec (Mpc). Over the past century, advances in technology and our understanding of astrophysical objects have refined this value. Today, the gold standard for measuring the Hubble constant involves Type 1a supernovae, which are consistent in their peak brightness and can be observed at great distances.

#### Modern Observational Techniques

Using robotic telescopes, astronomers have gathered data on numerous Type 1a supernovae, allowing for precise measurements of the Hubble constant. Adam Riess, a leading figure in this field, has consistently found a value of approximately 73 km/s/Mpc using these methods.

#### The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) Approach

Another method for determining the Hubble constant involves studying the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB), which is the afterglow of the Big Bang. This method, which assumes the Big Bang model, yields a value of about 67 km/s/Mpc. The CMB has been extensively studied using satellites over the past few decades.

#### The Crisis in Cosmology

The significant discrepancy between the observational method (73 km/s/Mpc) and the CMB method (67 km/s/Mpc) represents the Hubble tension. This difference exceeds the expected errors and has led to a crisis because both methods should theoretically agree if the underlying models are correct.

#### Secular Astronomers' Response

Many secular astronomers believe the discrepancy lies either in observational errors or in the need to tweak the Big Bang model. However, the consistency of recent observations using advanced telescopes like the James Webb Space Telescope supports the higher value obtained by Riess and his team.

#### Implications for the Big Bang Theory

While the Hubble tension doesn't necessarily mean the Big Bang model is entirely wrong, it suggests there are fundamental issues that need to be addressed. Some scientists, including Riess, are beginning to consider the possibility that our understanding of the universe might be flawed.

#### Biblical Creation Perspective

From a biblical creation standpoint, the expansion of the universe and the values obtained for the Hubble constant do not pose any conflicts. Creation astronomers are encouraged to develop models that align with biblical teachings. The observed values, such as 73 km/s/Mpc, are accepted within this framework.

#### Encouraging Future Generations

Young people interested in astronomy are encouraged to pursue their passion and contribute to this field. The need for more creation astronomers is emphasized, and the pursuit of scientific endeavors is seen as a way to honor and explore God's creation.

#### Conclusion

The Hubble tension highlights a major unresolved issue in cosmology. The discrepancy between different methods of measuring the universe's expansion rate challenges our current understanding and could potentially lead to significant changes in cosmological models. Whether this will ultimately "bust" the Big Bang theory remains to be seen, but it certainly opens up avenues for further exploration and discovery.
user
expand on this topic
ChatGPT
### The Hubble Tension: A Crisis in Cosmology

The Hubble tension refers to a significant discrepancy in the measured values of the Hubble constant, which quantifies the rate at which the universe is expanding. This discrepancy has profound implications for our understanding of the universe and has sparked considerable debate and research in the field of cosmology. Let's delve deeper into the background, implications, and potential resolutions of this cosmological conundrum.

#### Background: The Hubble Constant and Its Measurement

In 1929, Edwin Hubble discovered a correlation between the redshift of galaxies and their distances, which suggested that the universe is expanding. This relationship, known as the Hubble Law, states that the velocity at which a galaxy recedes from us (its redshift) is directly proportional to its distance. The proportionality constant in this relationship is the Hubble constant (H₀).

**Redshift and Distance:**
- **Redshift** measures how much the wavelength of light from a galaxy has been stretched due to the expansion of the universe. It is usually expressed in kilometers per second.
- **Distance** is typically measured in megaparsecs (Mpc), where 1 Mpc equals approximately 3.26 million light-years.

Over the past century, advances in telescopes, detectors, and our understanding of astrophysical objects have refined the measurement of the Hubble constant. However, two primary methods currently yield conflicting values:

1. **Observational Approach:**
   - This method relies on observing astronomical objects such as Cepheid variables and Type Ia supernovae to measure distances and redshifts.
   - Modern measurements using the Hubble Space Telescope and the James Webb Space Telescope have found a Hubble constant value of around 73 km/s/Mpc.

2. **Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) Approach:**
   - The CMB is the residual radiation from the Big Bang, providing a snapshot of the early universe.
   - Using data from satellites like the Planck mission, scientists model the early universe's conditions and infer the Hubble constant. This method yields a value of about 67 km/s/Mpc.

#### The Crisis: Discrepancy and Its Implications

The approximately 10% difference between the values obtained from these two methods is statistically significant and exceeds the expected measurement errors. This discrepancy, known as the Hubble tension, has several profound implications:

1. **Validity of the Big Bang Model:**
   - The Big Bang model has been the dominant cosmological paradigm for over half a century. If the model cannot reconcile these measurements, it suggests potential gaps in our understanding of the universe's history and structure.

2. **Potential New Physics:**
   - The discrepancy might indicate new physics beyond the standard model of cosmology. This could involve unknown forms of dark energy, dark matter interactions, or modifications to general relativity.

3. **Challenges in Measurement Techniques:**
   - It raises questions about the accuracy and assumptions underlying the two measurement methods. There could be unidentified systematic errors in the observational data or in the theoretical models used for the CMB analysis.

#### Potential Resolutions

Scientists are exploring various avenues to resolve the Hubble tension:

1. **Refining Observations:**
   - Improved telescopes and observational techniques could reduce uncertainties in distance measurements. Projects like the Vera Rubin Observatory aim to provide more precise data on supernovae and other standard candles.

2. **Reevaluating Theoretical Models:**
   - Adjusting cosmological models to account for potential new physics could help bridge the gap between the observed values. This includes exploring alternative theories of dark energy or modifications to general relativity.

3. **Cross-checking with Independent Methods:**
   - Using different astronomical phenomena, such as gravitational waves from binary neutron star mergers (standard sirens), could provide independent measurements of the Hubble constant.

#### Conclusion: The Future of Cosmology

The Hubble tension represents a significant challenge in modern cosmology, highlighting the limitations of our current understanding and the need for further research. Whether it leads to a paradigm shift or a refinement of existing models, addressing this discrepancy will deepen our comprehension of the universe's fundamental nature.

As we approach the centennial of Hubble's discovery, the quest to resolve the Hubble tension underscores the dynamic and evolving nature of cosmological science. By embracing new data, refining models, and remaining open to novel theories, scientists continue to unravel the mysteries of the cosmos, potentially leading to groundbreaking discoveries that could reshape our understanding of the universe.

